So to address the FCC mandate,
with all the wiggle room and
everything, it was pretty clear
that you needed GPS in the handset.
It was going to be very very expensive but
the potential applications were huge.
So after the initial knee-jerk reaction
of complaining that it cannot be done,
it would be too expensive,
whatever, by the operators, they
accepted the FCC E91 mandate and
promptly passed the buck to their vendors.
Now it was up to the handset vendors,
the infrastructure vendors,
and the chipset manufacturers
to provide this capability.
GPS works by triangulation or
trilateration.
You need signals from at least three
satellites, but four is always better.
And there are 24 satellites going
around the Earth twice a day and
you needed to get these signals
in order to find your location.
It's a very mature technology,
has been around for 35 years.
But to put it in the phones,
it requires new radios,
because GPS is 1.5 gigahertz and
1.2 gigahertz,
not the 800 to 900, and
1800 to 1900 megahertz specs.
And you also need a lot more computation
In the chipset in order to correlate
all the signals from the satellites and
estimate the position.
But by 2005,
GPS was standard fare in all smartphones,
and that was because there were so
many new and
engaging applications that
the GPS was going to unleash.
There were so many applications with
incredible amount of implications for
commerce and small business,
in addition to navigation and
other apps that you could use.
And also, it was going to unleash so
many clever social media applications.
So I think we should thank FCC for
mandating GPS in our cell phones.